# Libraries

A library is code enclosed in external files, which contains functionality to be included in a new codebase.
A library can be source code or precompiled. Regarding the C programming language, the source code can be a 
compilaion target for a static or dynamic library (or an executable).

## .a   -   Static Library

An archive ```.a``` file contains a library that may contain few functions or include an entire library of functions.
Archive files are typically created by the GNU ```ar``` utility. They are used as a compilation artifact and consequently 
embedded inside the target binary. The final binary that get produced from this libraries does not depend on the ```.a```
to work. 

## .so  -   Shared Object  |  Dynamic Library

A shared object ```.so``` file is a shared library used by programs. It contains common
programme functions and logic that multiple programs require access to, ```.so``` files 
allow programs to access common functions from one shared place in a computer's system memory,
rather than implementing their own versions of the functions. <b> They must be present in the system
and reachable from the linked ```ld```. </b>

Dynamic library files (```.so```) often reside in the following directories:

- ```/lib```
- ```/usr/lib```
- ```/usr/local/lib```

> Dynamic libraries are loaded at runtime, which means that they are not linked into a program at compile time like static libraries.

### What's inside a library files

To view a list of the functions an ```.so``` file contains, use:

```sh
nm objectfile.o
nm -D path/to/filename.so
```

To understand the dynamic libraries that an executable requires you can run:

```sh
ldd </path/to/executable>
```

Which will print all shared object dependencies.

## Library preprocessor directives

Preprocessor directives for libraries are used to make the code base
aware of additional external code.
 
```c
#include <mylib.h>

// use your library functions here
```

These lines are not program statements but directives 
for the preprocessor. The preprocessor examines the code before actual 
compilation of code begins and resolves all these directives before any code 
is actually generated by regular statements.


<!--  Script to show the footer   -->
<html>
<script
    src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-3.3.1.js"
    integrity="sha256-2Kok7MbOyxpgUVvAk/HJ2jigOSYS2auK4Pfzbm7uH60="
    crossorigin="anonymous">
</script>
<script>
$(function(){
  $("#footer").load("../footers/footer.html");
});
</script>
<body>
<div id="footer"></div>
</body>
</html>
